---
id: 0851d9af-7382-4d25-809a-faaaf13dcf19
published: false
blueprint: articles
title: 'What its like working on a badly architected web application'
author: 4f895e24-73e0-4cb2-9cad-38eb3637860e
summary: 'Reflecting on the pains and frustrations of working on a poorly architected web application in an enterprise environment'
updated_by: 4f895e24-73e0-4cb2-9cad-38eb3637860e
updated_at: 1740420381
---
I must first state that I have never been this tired from working on any programming projects. Imagine reading through thousands of lines of code with absolutely zero documentation and no real hints as to how to actually deploy any changes other than "FTP it up to the server". 

Some days I questioned my career choice and craved alcoholic beverages, other days I cursed so much, the other occupants in the house became concerned about my mental health.

Firstly, the backend is built with ColdFusion (CF) and I admit I had to Google it to know what exactly it is. I have no desire to learn how CF works, because I do not see any benefit for my career. Reading the documentation is not a fun experience, even though it is not too badly written. I get by just fine by utitlising Claude.ai to help me build basic methods and understand how I need to accomplish certain things in ColdFusion.

2. Publish to live and qa done with FTP (insecure). There's no guides/documentation about how to set up backend locally, all local dev and testing done in QA. QA out of date with live. Some data missing, so app throws so many errors due to inconsistent data.
3. Some features were directly implemented in the live environment, so not available in QA.
4. Poorly managed git commit history. Vague messages, so many spelling errors. Utter laziness can be seen here.
5. The front end is a collection of HTML pages, with sparse elements, all being generated by 10000+ line Javascript files. Weird naming conventions that make no sense to an outsider.
6. console.logs everywhere leaking data
7. memory leakage errors
8. webpack build times ridiculously slow.
9. commented out code that should have just been removed.
10. The app logs you out every time the app rebuilds when a JS, HTML, or CSS file is updated, and you have to log in again, then navigate back to where you where working, there's no URL you can simply refresh.
11. Saves user details in cookies and gets cleared everytime you refresh the page. These people don't seem to understand how web sessions work.
12. No routes definition anywhere, seems to keep track of your location in the app using indexedDB values.
13. No readme file and documentation provided by contractor. Verbally told me how to do things, "it's quite simple." No, it's not, you absolute fool.
14. Database design so shit, some data is duplicated, not in any normal form. For example, courses title language doesn't match course description language, and all of the tables are prefixed with either an "h" or "DD". I cannot remember why, but someone told me and it didn't really make sense.